# FYP_Docker_Jenkins_CI
Using Docker containers to improve the efficiency of a Continuous Integration environment.


### Introduction

The aim of my project is to investigate the claim that Docker containers can help improve the efficiency of a continuous integration development environment. 

Virtual containers have become very popular over the last number of years not least because of the release of a new software called Docker. Docker is a virtualisation container platform similar to virtual machines but lacking the significant disk space usage and bulk of virtual machines, making them fast, lightweight and portable, yet providing an isolation between containers. Continuous integration (CI) has seen a similar growth in adoption as a software development integration process since the early 2000's, becoming one of the most popular development techniques. It preaches the idea of small incremental code changes, with testing on those changes and the larger code base being carried out on a very regular basis. 

Synonymous with the advancement in computers since the early days has been the compulsive desire to make them faster and more efficient. These desires are replicated in the software development sector. Bringing a code commit from developer check-in, through extensive testing and delivered to its clients is always at the forefront of a software companies thoughts and improving this process to ensure it is of the highest standard, speed and efficiency is paramount.

Through experiencing this process first hand, I have seen some of the trials and tribulations associated with attempting to perfect it. A major issue I have found engineers face when organising how their CI process executes is when and where CI build and test plans can run. Often they require the same machine resources meaning any plans that aren't first to lock onto those resources will throw errors and result in plan failures. A general solution to this is to separate out the running of CI plans, designating certain plans to only be allowed execute on particular host machines. This can lead to a fast growth rate of how many machines a company maintains and the under utilisation of the machines they do have. This culminates in an unnecessary expense of purchasing and running new machines when they may already have more than enough. As the company grows, their code base gets larger, so does their CI process. They also have to start assigning engineers whose sole job is to maintain these machines and ensure the CI process executes only where it can. Should companies just keep buying new machines to accommodate this? That seems very inefficient, costly and non-scalable. Docker containers do not know about other containers, each getting a section of the Docker host kernel, leading them to believe they are the sole machine in operation. What if engineers could use this isolation aspect of Docker containers to run conflicting CI plans on the same host machine?

In continuous integration, code changes are not accepted until they have passed all tests and been through the CI process, so any host machine related failures in a plan leads to a delay in the acceptance of these code changes, even when it may be perfectly working and acceptable code. What if the code change is a vital update for a very serious bug that engineers need to release to consumers immediately? The last thing engineers need to be dealing with in these circumstances are avoidable machine conflicts as they leave a security risk exposed or lose customers who give up waiting on a bug fix and search for a competitive product. Even in the day to day operations of a CI environment, using Docker containers provides the chance of making engineers lives easier, improving the quality of their work by giving them the time back they would have spent ensuring their CI process is successful.

Virtual machines have long held the possibility to captivate the DevQA sector who are tasked with maintaining and improving the integration process, but never has. A major reason for this is the hefty size of each virtual machine as they contain entire operating systems within them. They provide isolation, flexibility and reproducibility - all characteristics DevQA engineers dream of, yet the disk space required of each virtual machine dampens their hopes of achieving an ideal integration environment. 

Although it could be regarded as still being in its infancy, Docker provides the hope and opportunity to overcome what virtual machines couldn't. Featuring a different architecture to that of virtual machines, Docker containers lack a full scale operating system instead opting to allow each container to share a kernel. Those sought after isolation, flexibility and reproducibility characteristics can be given to Docker containers along with the claim of being lightweight in size. Docker provides the hope and opportunity of reducing CI machine failures, reducing the number of host machines required and speeding up the overall process making it more efficient.

While undertaking this project I will look to compare the use of Docker containers, virtual machines and standard bare metal as a means to run a continuous integration environment to find out if Docker can become the saviour and future of DevQA operations it has the potential to be.


### Primary Objectives
 
* To measure how using Docker containers will \textbf{speed} up the overall running time of the CI process.
 * item E.g. collate the time duration each CI plan takes to run, the time duration of the overall process, and other time metrics from the different environments to perform a comparison of containers vs virtual machines vs host servers.
* To measure how using Docker containers will increase the \textbf{success} of building and testing a software product previously restricted by computer resources.
 * E.g. show how the isolation provided by containers can help increase CI success vs host servers. A significant feature of Docker containers and VMs is they do not know about another's existence by default. Each Docker container and VM is designated its own resources, reducing file conflicts and shared usage. The diminished error rate would help improve the success of a CI process.
* To measure how using Docker containers can reduce the \textbf{cost} of supporting a CI environment.
 * E.g. show how using containers to run conflicting CI plans on the same host can reduce the amount of hosts needed. One way to solve computational resource conflicts which occur in the CI process is to run plans on separate machines. With CI environments often consisting of thousands of plans the amount of machines needed to run and avoid conflicts can become very large. Through running CI plans in isolated containers on the same host machine, the number of host machines can be greatly reduced along with the cost of purchasing and maintaining new machines.
